We're now going to talk about the most
fundamental, important concept
in moving from someone that just
uses JavaScript to someone that
deeply understands it and
isn't scared by some of the weird and
odder looking things
that happen inside of it.
A concept that will
expand your knowledge and
ability as a programmer to use
JavaScript in ways that other modern and
popular programming languages can't match.
The idea is called first class functions.
In JavaScript, functions are objects.
All right, well,
first of all, big word alert.
First class functions sounds complicated.
Not really.
First class functions means that
in the programming language.
JavaScript isn't the only language
that has first class functions,
but I would say it's definitely
the most popular nowadays.
Everything you can do with other types,
objects,
strings, numbers, booleans,
you can do with functions.
You can assign variables to
have a value that's a function.
You can pass functions around as
parameters to other functions.
You can create functions on the fly
with the kind of literal syntax.
First class functions change
the way you can program.
They can open up the horizons
to completely different
approaches to solving problems.
So when we say that functions
are objects in JavaScript,
what does the function object look like?
Well, just like any object in JavaScript,
it resides in memory.
It's a special type of object, though,
because it has all the features
of a normal object and
has some other special properties.
So one thing that people are surprised
about when they see JavaScript is that
you can attach properties and
methods to a function.
Why?
Because it's just an object.
So I could attach a primitive,
a name value pair.
I could attach an object.
I could attach other functions.
This actually does happen and
can be useful in JavaScript,
and we'll see that later.
In JavaScript, though, the function object
has some hidden special properties.
Two important ones are its name.
Now a function in JavaScript
doesn't have to have a name.
A function, then,
can be what's called anonymous,
anonymous meaning it doesn't have a name.
But it can have a name.
There's another property
called the code property
where the actual lines of
code that you've written sit.
So essentially, from this vantage
point anyway that we're talking about,
the code that you write gets placed into
a special property of the function object.
So it isn't like the code that
you write is the function.
The function is an object
with other properties.
And the code that you write is just
one of those properties that you're
adding onto it.
What's special about that
property is it's invocable,
meaning that you can say, run this code.
Run the code sitting on that property.
And that's when the entire
execution context creation and
execution on all of that happens.
It's imperative that you have this
mental model of a function in your mind
as we go through the rest of this course.
You have to think of
a function object whose
code just happens to be one of
the properties of that object.
There are other things that
the function can have attached to it.
There are other things
the function can do.
And it can be moved around, copied and
given to other elements or other areas of
your code, just like any object or value,
just like a string or just like a number.
This allows for
some fascinating programming approaches.
And it allows for some really
interesting syntax that can look
really weird if you don't understand
this fundamental concept.
All right, just to prove it,
let's try something.
All right, I have an empty f.js file and
I'm gonna just type out a function.
Let's say function greet, and
it's just going to console.log('hi').
So it's a function.
But remember we said that functions
are actually objects in JavaScript.
So using dot notation I
can create a property.
Let's say language = 'english'.
Look at that for a second.
Take that in.
I just added a property to a function.
In other programming languages, this
just isn't possible, but in JavaScript,
functions are objects, and the code I
wrote is just a property of that object.
Now if I was to console.log(greet);,
something interesting happens.
In JavaScript I actually get the text
of the function that I wrote.
So that's not too useful in this case, but
if I actually try to go find
that property on that function,
using the dot operator, there it is.
The value is there.
It's in memory.
It's a property attached to the function,
just like you could attach
a property to any object.
Because in JavaScript, functions are what?
Objects.
So when I created this function,
what did it look like?
I had this greet function,
and when it was created,
this function object was put in memory,
in this case,
onto the global object, and it had a name.
So the name property is greet,
because that's what I named my function.
And it has a code property that
contains the code that I wrote,
the body of my function.
And so if I was to call
greet using the parentheses,
that invokes that code, causes it to run,
causes that execution context
to be created, etc., etc.
See how this works?
You have to think of a function as
more than just this container of code.
It's an object, and as such,
you can pass it around.
It sits in memory at a specific location.
It has properties, it has methods.
Why?
Because, say it with me,
in JavaScript functions are objects.
All right, now we're going to see just
how interesting this can make our code.